The gentleman who accompanies, his name is
Mr.
Chatterjee but I have never seen anyone so
far, playing those talas [rhythms] on tabla
so well.
It’s alright to play all North Indian talas
on tabla, but to mix up both and to manage
the South Indian talas on tabla is the first
time I am seeing.
Otherwise they normally use mrudungum.
It is a very, very unique combination of things
we have worked out and, if you have time,
do come some time to our centre and we’ll
explain to you what is the naada [sound] and
what does it mean and what is this great instrument
which is called as veena, which is the Primordial
Instrument.
All the instruments are variations and manifestations
of this instrument, which is the first, the
primordial, conceived first, in the awareness
of human beings and that’s why it is regarded
as a holy instrument.
It is in the hand of the Goddess Saraswati,
who is the Goddess of Learning and of Lalitakala,
meaning the five arts.
According to the great seers, the Goddess
of Learning suggests or symbolises a personality
which must know music; means if a person,
if he is learned, then he must know what is
music.
If he doesn’t understand music, then he’s
not yet a perfect, learned man.
Everybody who is a learned man, must know
music.
That is indicated by this instrument in the
hands of Saraswati.
And there are two other things She has: one
hand has got books in the hands, that she
should really know the real Scriptures, or
the person who is a learned man must know
real Scriptures, the truths about the real
Scriptures.
They should be able to discriminate which
is real and which is unreal.
Then another is, in the hand, is a rosary,
means a person who is learned must be a detached
person.
If you do not play veena with a detached mind
the spontaneity gets controlled by your conditioning.
That’s why it is important that a person
should be a Realised soul and, when you are
a Realised soul, the spontaneity flows absolutely
unhindered, unobstructed by your conditionings,
by your biased temperaments, by your misidentifications.
And that is why, after Self-realisation only,
I find, that Mr.
Rayat has suddenly started manifesting it
so beautifully and the whole thing is blossoming
so good.
I’m sorry that people from London could
not come over here to listen to him because
we have specially arranged this program in
such a manner that it makes [it] interesting
and understandable for all of you.
Doesn’t matter, next time, again, we are
going to try this.
But I am really very happy to see him working
out the inner being within you – the inner
force of Kundalini, the force of your residual
consciousness which gives you Realisation
– beautifully on veena, which is a very,
very rare thing; seldom people can do it,
and I could see that and I congratulate him.
And may God give him more and more of this
art so that he puts spirituality into an awakening
state into many people who are seeking it.
May God bless you all!